There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom
by Richard Feynman
December 29, 1959

I imagine experimental physicists must often look with envy at men like Kamerlingh Onnes, 
who discovered a field which seems to be bottomless and which has held the interest of 
physicists for fifty years. Such a man is lucky to be at the right place at the right time.

What I want to talk about is the problem of manipulating and controlling things on a small 
scale. As soon as I mention this, people tell me about miniaturization, and how far it has 
progressed today. They tell me about electric motors that are the size of the nail on your 
small finger. There is a device on the market, they tell me, by which you can write the Lord's 
Prayer on the head of a pin. But that's nothing; that's the most primitive, halting step in 
the direction I intend to discuss.

I would like to describe a field, in which little has been done, but in which an enormous 
amount can be done in principle. This field is not quite the same as the others in that it 
will not tell us much of fundamental physics (in the sense of, "What are the strange particles?") 
but it is more like solid-state physics in the sense that it might tell us much of great 
interest about the strange phenomena that occur in complex situations. Furthermore, a point 
that is most important is that it would have an enormous number of technical applications.

What I want to talk about is the problem of manipulating things on a small scale. As soon as 
I mention this, I run into trouble — people immediately think I mean electronics, and they 
start talking about transistors. No, I don't mean that at all. I mean the possibility of 
actually building things atom by atom, molecule by molecule.

Why cannot we write the entire 24 volumes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica on the head of a pin?

Let's see what would be involved. The head of a pin is a sixteenth of an inch across. If we 
magnify it by 25,000 diameters, the area of the head of a pin is then equal to the area of 
all the pages of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. Therefore, all it is necessary to do is to 
reduce in size all the writing in the Encyclopaedia by 25,000 times. Is that possible? 

The atoms on a metal surface are still spaced, let us say, two or three angstroms apart — 
about one or two angstroms. In between, if the system is clean, there is nothing. We have 
plenty of room. So in principle it is possible to put enormous amounts of information in a 
very small space.

I am not afraid of the last word here. "There's plenty of room at the bottom."
