1–1Electrical forces
Consider a force like gravitation which varies predominantly inversely as the square of the distance, but which is about a billion-billion-billion-billion times stronger. And with another difference. There are two kinds of “matter,” which we can call positive and negative. Like kinds repel and unlike kinds attract—unlike gravity where there is only attraction. What would happen?

A bunch of positives would repel with an enormous force and spread out in all directions. A bunch of negatives would do the same. But an evenly mixed bunch of positives and negatives would do something completely different. The opposite pieces would be pulled together by the enormous attractions. The net result would be that the terrific forces would balance themselves out almost perfectly, by forming tight, fine mixtures of the positive and the negative, and between two separate bunches of such mixtures there would be practically no attraction or repulsion at all.

There is such a force: the electrical force. And all matter is a mixture of positive protons and negative electrons which are attracting and repelling with this great force. So perfect is the balance, however, that when you stand near someone else you don’t feel any force at all. If there were even a little bit of unbalance you would know it. If you were standing at arm’s length from someone and each of you had one percent more electrons than protons, the repelling force would be incredible. How great? Enough to lift the Empire State Building? No! To lift Mount Everest? No! The repulsion would be enough to lift a “weight” equal to that of the entire earth!

With such enormous forces so perfectly balanced in this intimate mixture, it is not hard to understand that matter, trying to keep its positive and negative charges in the finest balance, can have a great stiffness and strength. The Empire State Building, for example, swings less than one inch in the wind because the electrical forces hold every electron and proton more or less in its proper place. On the other hand, if we look at matter on a scale small enough that we see only a few atoms, any small piece will not, usually, have an equal number of positive and negative charges, and so there will be strong residual electrical forces. Even when there are equal numbers of both charges in two neighboring small pieces, there may still be large net electrical forces because the forces between individual charges vary inversely as the square of the distance. A net force can arise if a negative charge of one piece is closer to the positive than to the negative charges of the other piece. The attractive forces can then be larger than the repulsive ones and there can be a net attraction between two small pieces with no excess charges. The force that holds the atoms together, and the chemical forces that hold molecules together, are really electrical forces acting in regions where the balance of charge is not perfect, or where the distances are very small.

You know, of course, that atoms are made with positive protons in the nucleus and with electrons outside. You may ask: “If this electrical force is so terrific, why don’t the protons and electrons just get on top of each other? If they want to be in an intimate mixture, why isn’t it still more intimate?” The answer has to do with the quantum effects. If we try to confine our electrons in a region that is very close to the protons, then according to the uncertainty principle they must have some mean square momentum which is larger the more we try to confine them. It is this motion, required by the laws of quantum mechanics, that keeps the electrical attraction from bringing the charges any closer together.

There is another question: “What holds the nucleus together”? In a nucleus there are several protons, all of which are positive. Why don’t they push themselves apart? It turns out that in nuclei there are, in addition to electrical forces, nonelectrical forces, called nuclear forces, which are greater than the electrical forces and which are able to hold the protons together in spite of the electrical repulsion. The nuclear forces, however, have a short range—their force falls off much more rapidly than 1/r2
. And this has an important consequence. If a nucleus has too many protons in it, it gets too big, and it will not stay together. An example is uranium, with 92 protons. The nuclear forces act mainly between each proton (or neutron) and its nearest neighbor, while the electrical forces act over larger distances, giving a repulsion between each proton and all of the others in the nucleus. The more protons in a nucleus, the stronger is the electrical repulsion, until, as in the case of uranium, the balance is so delicate that the nucleus is almost ready to fly apart from the repulsive electrical force. If such a nucleus is just “tapped” lightly (as can be done by sending in a slow neutron), it breaks into two pieces, each with positive charge, and these pieces fly apart by electrical repulsion. The energy which is liberated is the energy of the atomic bomb. This energy is usually called “nuclear” energy, but it is really “electrical” energy released when electrical forces have overcome the attractive nuclear forces.

Lower case Greek letters and commonly used capitals
α
alpha	ι
iota	ρ
rho
β
beta	κ
kappa	σ
Σ
sigma
γ
Γ
gamma	λ
Λ
lambda	τ
tau
δ
Δ
delta	μ
mu	υ
Υ
upsilon
ϵ
epsilon	ν
nu	ϕ
Φ
phi
ζ
zeta	ξ
Ξ
xi (ksi)	χ
chi (khi)
η
eta	o
omicron	ψ
Ψ
psi
θ
Θ
theta	π
Π
pi	ω
Ω
omega
We may ask, finally, what holds a negatively charged electron together (since it has no nuclear forces). If an electron is all made of one kind of substance, each part should repel the other parts. Why, then, doesn’t it fly apart? But does the electron have “parts”? Perhaps we should say that the electron is just a point and that electrical forces only act between different point charges, so that the electron does not act upon itself. Perhaps. All we can say is that the question of what holds the electron together has produced many difficulties in the attempts to form a complete theory of electromagnetism. The question has never been answered. We will entertain ourselves by discussing this subject some more in later chapters.

As we have seen, we should expect that it is a combination of electrical forces and quantum-mechanical effects that will determine the detailed structure of materials in bulk, and, therefore, their properties. Some materials are hard, some are soft. Some are electrical “conductors”—because their electrons are free to move about; others are “insulators”—because their electrons are held tightly to individual atoms. We shall consider later how some of these properties come about, but that is a very complicated subject, so we will begin by looking at the electrical forces only in simple situations. We begin by treating only the laws of electricity—including magnetism, which is really a part of the same subject.

We have said that the electrical force, like a gravitational force, decreases inversely as the square of the distance between charges. This relationship is called Coulomb’s law. But it is not precisely true when charges are moving—the electrical forces depend also on the motions of the charges in a complicated way. One part of the force between moving charges we call the magnetic force. It is really one aspect of an electrical effect. That is why we call the subject “electromagnetism.”

There is an important general principle that makes it possible to treat electromagnetic forces in a relatively simple way. We find, from experiment, that the force that acts on a particular charge—no matter how many other charges there are or how they are moving—depends only on the position of that particular charge, on the velocity of the charge, and on the amount of charge. We can write the force F
 on a charge q
 moving with a velocity v
 as
F=q(E+v×B).(1.1)
We call E
 the electric field and B
 the magnetic field at the location of the charge. The important thing is that the electrical forces from all the other charges in the universe can be summarized by giving just these two vectors. Their values will depend on where the charge is, and may change with time. Furthermore, if we replace that charge with another charge, the force on the new charge will be just in proportion to the amount of charge so long as all the rest of the charges in the world do not change their positions or motions. (In real situations, of course, each charge produces forces on all other charges in the neighborhood and may cause these other charges to move, and so in some cases the fields can change if we replace our particular charge by another.)

We know from Vol. I how to find the motion of a particle if we know the force on it. Equation (1.1) can be combined with the equation of motion to give
ddt[mv(1−v2/c2)1/2]=F=q(E+v×B).(1.2)
So if E
 and B
 are given, we can find the motions. Now we need to know how the E
’s and B
’s are produced.

One of the most important simplifying principles about the way the fields are produced is this: Suppose a number of charges moving in some manner would produce a field E1
, and another set of charges would produce E2
. If both sets of charges are in place at the same time (keeping the same locations and motions they had when considered separately), then the field produced is just the sum
E=E1+E2.(1.3)
This fact is called the principle of superposition of fields. It holds also for magnetic fields.

This principle means that if we know the law for the electric and magnetic fields produced by a single charge moving in an arbitrary way, then all the laws of electrodynamics are complete. If we want to know the force on charge A
 we need only calculate the E
 and B
 produced by each of the charges B
, C
, D
, etc., and then add the E
’s and B
’s from all the charges to find the fields, and from them the forces acting on charge A
. If it had only turned out that the field produced by a single charge was simple, this would be the neatest way to describe the laws of electrodynamics. We have already given a description of this law (Chapter 28, Vol. I) and it is, unfortunately, rather complicated.

It turns out that the forms in which the laws of electrodynamics are simplest are not what you might expect. It is not simplest to give a formula for the force that one charge produces on another. It is true that when charges are standing still the Coulomb force law is simple, but when charges are moving about the relations are complicated by delays in time and by the effects of acceleration, among others. As a result, we do not wish to present electrodynamics only through the force laws between charges; we find it more convenient to consider another point of view—a point of view in which the laws of electrodynamics appear to be the most easily manageable.

1–2Electric and magnetic fields
First, we must extend, somewhat, our ideas of the electric and magnetic vectors, E
 and B
. We have defined them in terms of the forces that are felt by a charge. We wish now to speak of electric and magnetic fields at a point even when there is no charge present. We are saying, in effect, that since there are forces “acting on” the charge, there is still “something” there when the charge is removed. If a charge located at the point (x,y,z)
 at the time t
 feels the force F
 given by Eq. (1.1) we associate the vectors E
 and B
 with the point in space (x,y,z)
. We may think of E(x,y,z,t)
 and B(x,y,z,t)
 as giving the forces that would be experienced at the time t
 by a charge located at (x,y,z)
, with the condition that placing the charge there did not disturb the positions or motions of all the other charges responsible for the fields.

Following this idea, we associate with every point (x,y,z)
 in space two vectors E
 and B
, which may be changing with time. The electric and magnetic fields are, then, viewed as vector functions of x
, y
, z
, and t
. Since a vector is specified by its components, each of the fields E(x,y,z,t)
 and B(x,y,z,t)
 represents three mathematical functions of x
, y
, z
, and t
.

It is precisely because E
 (or B
) can be specified at every point in space that it is called a “field.” A “field” is any physical quantity which takes on different values at different points in space. Temperature, for example, is a field—in this case a scalar field, which we write as T(x,y,z)
. The temperature could also vary in time, and we would say the temperature field is time-dependent, and write T(x,y,z,t)
. Another example is the “velocity field” of a flowing liquid. We write v(x,y,z,t)
 for the velocity of the liquid at each point in space at the time t
. It is a vector field.

Returning to the electromagnetic fields—although they are produced by charges according to complicated formulas, they have the following important characteristic: the relationships between the values of the fields at one point and the values at a nearby point are very simple. With only a few such relationships in the form of differential equations we can describe the fields completely. It is in terms of such equations that the laws of electrodynamics are most simply written.

There have been various inventions to help the mind visualize the behavior of fields. The most correct is also the most abstract: we simply consider the fields as mathematical functions of position and time. We can also attempt to get a mental picture of the field by drawing vectors at many points in space, each of which gives the field strength and direction at that point. Such a representation is shown in Fig. 1–1. We can go further, however, and draw lines which are everywhere tangent to the vectors—which, so to speak, follow the arrows and keep track of the direction of the field. When we do this we lose track of the lengths of the vectors, but we can keep track of the strength of the field by drawing the lines far apart when the field is weak and close together when it is strong. We adopt the convention that the number of lines per unit area at right angles to the lines is proportional to the field strength. This is, of course, only an approximation, and it will require, in general, that new lines sometimes start up in order to keep the number up to the strength of the field. The field of Fig. 1–1 is represented by field lines in Fig. 1–2.


Fig. 1–1.A vector field may be represented by drawing a set of arrows whose magnitudes and directions indicate the values of the vector field at the points from which the arrows are drawn.
 
Fig. 1–2.A vector field can be represented by drawing lines which are tangent to the direction of the field vector at each point, and by drawing the density of lines proportional to the magnitude of the field vector.
1–3Characteristics of vector fields
There are two mathematically important properties of a vector field which we will use in our description of the laws of electricity from the field point of view. Suppose we imagine a closed surface of some kind and ask whether we are losing “something” from the inside; that is, does the field have a quality of “outflow”? For instance, for a velocity field we might ask whether the velocity is always outward on the surface or, more generally, whether more fluid flows out (per unit time) than comes in. We call the net amount of fluid going out through the surface per unit time the “flux of velocity” through the surface. The flow through an element of a surface is just equal to the component of the velocity perpendicular to the surface times the area of the surface. For an arbitrary closed surface, the net outward flow—or flux—is the average outward normal component of the velocity, times the area of the surface:
Flux=(averagenormalcomponent)⋅(surfacearea).(1.4)


Fig. 1–3.The flux of a vector field through a surface is defined as the average value of the normal component of the vector times the area of the surface.
In the case of an electric field, we can mathematically define something analogous to an outflow, and we again call it the flux, but of course it is not the flow of any substance, because the electric field is not the velocity of anything. It turns out, however, that the mathematical quantity which is the average normal component of the field still has a useful significance. We speak, then, of the electric flux—also defined by Eq. (1.4). Finally, it is also useful to speak of the flux not only through a completely closed surface, but through any bounded surface. As before, the flux through such a surface is defined as the average normal component of a vector times the area of the surface. These ideas are illustrated in Fig. 1–3.


Fig. 1–4.(a) The velocity field in a liquid. Imagine a tube of uniform cross section that follows an arbitrary closed curve as in (b). If the liquid were suddenly frozen everywhere except inside the tube, the liquid in the tube would circulate as shown in (c).
There is a second property of a vector field that has to do with a line, rather than a surface. Suppose again that we think of a velocity field that describes the flow of a liquid. We might ask this interesting question: Is the liquid circulating? By that we mean: Is there a net rotational motion around some loop? Suppose that we instantaneously freeze the liquid everywhere except inside of a tube which is of uniform bore, and which goes in a loop that closes back on itself as in Fig. 1–4. Outside of the tube the liquid stops moving, but inside the tube it may keep on moving because of the momentum in the trapped liquid—that is, if there is more momentum heading one way around the tube than the other. We define a quantity called the circulation as the resulting speed of the liquid in the tube times its circumference. We can again extend our ideas and define the “circulation” for any vector field (even when there isn’t anything moving). For any vector field the circulation around any imagined closed curve is defined as the average tangential component of the vector (in a consistent sense) multiplied by the circumference of the loop (Fig. 1–5):
Circulation=(averagetangentialcomponent)⋅(distancearound)(1.5)
You will see that this definition does indeed give a number which is proportional to the circulation velocity in the quickly frozen tube described above.


Fig. 1–5.The circulation of a vector field is the average tangential component of the vector (in a consistent sense) times the circumference of the loop.
With just these two ideas—flux and circulation—we can describe all the laws of electricity and magnetism at once. You may not understand the significance of the laws right away, but they will give you some idea of the way the physics of electromagnetism will be ultimately described.

1–4The laws of electromagnetism
The first law of electromagnetism describes the flux of the electric field:
⎛⎝Flux of Ethrough anyclosed surface⎞⎠=(net chargeinside)ϵ0,(1.6)
where ϵ0
 is a convenient constant. (The constant ϵ0
 is usually read as “epsilon-zero” or “epsilon-naught”.) If there are no charges inside the surface, even though there are charges nearby outside the surface, the average normal component of E
 is zero, so there is no net flux through the surface. To show the power of this type of statement, we can show that Eq. (1.6) is the same as Coulomb’s law, provided only that we also add the idea that the field from a single charge is spherically symmetric. For a point charge, we draw a sphere around the charge. Then the average normal component is just the value of the magnitude of E
 at any point, since the field must be directed radially and have the same strength for all points on the sphere. Our rule now says that the field at the surface of the sphere, times the area of the sphere—that is, the outgoing flux—is proportional to the charge inside. If we were to make the radius of the sphere bigger, the area would increase as the square of the radius. The average normal component of the electric field times that area must still be equal to the same charge inside, and so the field must decrease as the square of the distance—we get an “inverse square” field.

If we have an arbitrary stationary curve in space and measure the circulation of the electric field around the curve, we will find that it is not, in general, zero (although it is for the Coulomb field). Rather, for electricity there is a second law that states: for any surface S
 (not closed) whose edge is the curve C
,
(Circulation of Earound C)=−ddt(flux of Bthrough S).(1.7)

We can complete the laws of the electromagnetic field by writing two corresponding equations for the magnetic field B
:
⎛⎝Flux of Bthrough anyclosed surface⎞⎠=0.(1.8)
For a surface S
 bounded by the curve C
,
c2(circulation of Baround C)=ddt(flux of Ethrough S)+(flux ofelectric currentthrough S)ϵ0.(1.9)

The constant c2
 that appears in Eq. (1.9) is the square of the velocity of light. It appears because magnetism is in reality a relativistic effect of electricity. The constant ϵ0
 has been stuck in to make the units of electric current come out in a convenient way.

Equations (1.6) through (1.9), together with Eq. (1.1), are all the laws of electrodynamics1. As you remember, the laws of Newton were very simple to write down, but they had a lot of complicated consequences and it took us a long time to learn about them all. These laws are not nearly as simple to write down, which means that the consequences are going to be more elaborate and it will take us quite a lot of time to figure them all out.


Fig. 1–6.A bar magnet gives a field B
 at a wire. When there is a current along the wire, the wire moves because of the force F=qv×B
.
We can illustrate some of the laws of electrodynamics by a series of small experiments which show qualitatively the interrelationships of electric and magnetic fields. You have experienced the first term of Eq. (1.1) when combing your hair, so we won’t show that one. The second part of Eq. (1.1) can be demonstrated by passing a current through a wire which hangs above a bar magnet, as shown in Fig. 1–6. The wire will move when a current is turned on because of the force F=qv×B
. When a current exists, the charges inside the wire are moving, so they have a velocity v
, and the magnetic field from the magnet exerts a force on them, which results in pushing the wire sideways.

When the wire is pushed to the left, we would expect that the magnet must feel a push to the right. (Otherwise we could put the whole thing on a wagon and have a propulsion system that didn’t conserve momentum!) Although the force is too small to make movement of the bar magnet visible, a more sensitively supported magnet, like a compass needle, will show the movement.

How does the wire push on the magnet? The current in the wire produces a magnetic field of its own that exerts forces on the magnet. According to the last term in Eq. (1.9), a current must have a circulation of B
—in this case, the lines of B
 are loops around the wire, as shown in Fig. 1–7. This B
-field is responsible for the force on the magnet.


Fig. 1–7.The magnetic field of the wire exerts a force on the magnet.
Equation (1.9) tells us that for a fixed current through the wire the circulation of B
 is the same for any curve that surrounds the wire. For curves—say circles—that are farther away from the wire, the circumference is larger, so the tangential component of B
 must decrease. You can see that we would, in fact, expect B
 to decrease linearly with the distance from a long straight wire.

Now, we have said that a current through a wire produces a magnetic field, and that when there is a magnetic field present there is a force on a wire carrying a current. Then we should also expect that if we make a magnetic field with a current in one wire, it should exert a force on another wire which also carries a current. This can be shown by using two hanging wires as shown in Fig. 1–8. When the currents are in the same direction, the two wires attract, but when the currents are opposite, they repel.


Fig. 1–8.Two wires, carrying current, exert forces on each other.
In short, electrical currents, as well as magnets, make magnetic fields. But wait, what is a magnet, anyway? If magnetic fields are produced by moving charges, is it not possible that the magnetic field from a piece of iron is really the result of currents? It appears to be so. We can replace the bar magnet of our experiment with a coil of wire, as shown in Fig. 1–9. When a current is passed through the coil—as well as through the straight wire above it—we observe a motion of the wire exactly as before, when we had a magnet instead of a coil. In other words, the current in the coil imitates a magnet. It appears, then, that a piece of iron acts as though it contains a perpetual circulating current. We can, in fact, understand magnets in terms of permanent currents in the atoms of the iron. The force on the magnet in Fig. 1–7 is due to the second term in Eq. (1.1).


Fig. 1–9.The bar magnet of Fig. 1–6 can be replaced by a coil carrying an electrical current. A similar force acts on the wire.
Where do the currents come from? One possibility would be from the motion of the electrons in atomic orbits. Actually, that is not the case for iron, although it is for some materials. In addition to moving around in an atom, an electron also spins about on its own axis—something like the spin of the earth—and it is the current from this spin that gives the magnetic field in iron. (We say “something like the spin of the earth” because the question is so deep in quantum mechanics that the classical ideas do not really describe things too well.) In most substances, some electrons spin one way and some spin the other, so the magnetism cancels out, but in iron—for a mysterious reason which we will discuss later—many of the electrons are spinning with their axes lined up, and that is the source of the magnetism.

Since the fields of magnets are from currents, we do not have to add any extra term to Eqs. (1.8) or (1.9) to take care of magnets. We just take all currents, including the circulating currents of the spinning electrons, and then the law is right. You should also notice that Eq. (1.8) says that there are no magnetic “charges” analogous to the electrical charges appearing on the right side of Eq. (1.6). None has been found.


Fig. 1–10.The circulation of B
 around the curve C
 is given either by the current passing through the surface S1
, or by the rate of change of the flux of E
 through the surface S2
.
The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (1.9) was discovered theoretically by Maxwell and is of great importance. It says that changing electric fields produce magnetic effects. In fact, without this term the equation would not make sense, because without it there could be no currents in circuits that are not complete loops. But such currents do exist, as we can see in the following example. Imagine a capacitor made of two flat plates. It is being charged by a current that flows toward one plate and away from the other, as shown in Fig. 1–10. We draw a curve C
 around one of the wires and fill it in with a surface which crosses the wire, as shown by the surface S1
 in the figure. According to Eq. (1.9), the circulation of B
 around C
 (times c2
) is given by the current in the wire (divided by ϵ0
). But what if we fill in the curve with a different surface S2
, which is shaped like a bowl and passes between the plates of the capacitor, staying always away from the wire? There is certainly no current through this surface. But, surely, just changing the location of an imaginary surface is not going to change a real magnetic field! The circulation of B
 must be what it was before. The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (1.9) does, indeed, combine with the second term to give the same result for the two surfaces S1
 and S2
. For S2
 the circulation of B
 is given in terms of the rate of change of the flux of E
 between the plates of the capacitor. And it works out that the changing E
 is related to the current in just the way required for Eq. (1.9) to be correct. Maxwell saw that it was needed, and he was the first to write the complete equation.

With the setup shown in Fig. 1–6 we can demonstrate another of the laws of electromagnetism. We disconnect the ends of the hanging wire from the battery and connect them to a galvanometer which tells us when there is a current through the wire. When we push the wire sideways through the magnetic field of the magnet, we observe a current. Such an effect is again just another consequence of Eq. (1.1)—the electrons in the wire feel the force F=qv×B
. The electrons have a sidewise velocity because they move with the wire. This v
 with a vertical B
 from the magnet results in a force on the electrons directed along the wire, which starts the electrons moving toward the galvanometer.

Suppose, however, that we leave the wire alone and move the magnet. We guess from relativity that it should make no difference, and indeed, we observe a similar current in the galvanometer. How does the magnetic field produce forces on charges at rest? According to Eq. (1.1) there must be an electric field. A moving magnet must make an electric field. How that happens is said quantitatively by Eq. (1.7). This equation describes many phenomena of great practical interest, such as those that occur in electric generators and transformers.

The most remarkable consequence of our equations is that the combination of Eq. (1.7) and Eq. (1.9) contains the explanation of the radiation of electromagnetic effects over large distances. The reason is roughly something like this: suppose that somewhere we have a magnetic field which is increasing because, say, a current is turned on suddenly in a wire. Then by Eq. (1.7) there must be a circulation of an electric field. As the electric field builds up to produce its circulation, then according to Eq. (1.9) a magnetic circulation will be generated. But the building up of this magnetic field will produce a new circulation of the electric field, and so on. In this way fields work their way through space without the need of charges or currents except at their source. That is the way we see each other! It is all in the equations of the electromagnetic fields.

1–5What are the fields?
We now make a few remarks on our way of looking at this subject. You may be saying: “All this business of fluxes and circulations is pretty abstract. There are electric fields at every point in space; then there are these ‘laws.’ But what is actually happening? Why can’t you explain it, for instance, by whatever it is that goes between the charges.” Well, it depends on your prejudices. Many physicists used to say that direct action with nothing in between was inconceivable. (How could they find an idea inconceivable when it had already been conceived?) They would say: “Look, the only forces we know are the direct action of one piece of matter on another. It is impossible that there can be a force with nothing to transmit it.” But what really happens when we study the “direct action” of one piece of matter right against another? We discover that it is not one piece right against the other; they are slightly separated, and there are electrical forces acting on a tiny scale. Thus we find that we are going to explain so-called direct-contact action in terms of the picture for electrical forces. It is certainly not sensible to try to insist that an electrical force has to look like the old, familiar, muscular push or pull, when it will turn out that the muscular pushes and pulls are going to be interpreted as electrical forces! The only sensible question is what is the most convenient way to look at electrical effects. Some people prefer to represent them as the interaction at a distance of charges, and to use a complicated law. Others love the field lines. They draw field lines all the time, and feel that writing E
’s and B
’s is too abstract. The field lines, however, are only a crude way of describing a field, and it is very difficult to give the correct, quantitative laws directly in terms of field lines. Also, the ideas of the field lines do not contain the deepest principle of electrodynamics, which is the superposition principle. Even though we know how the field lines look for one set of charges and what the field lines look like for another set of charges, we don’t get any idea about what the field line patterns will look like when both sets are present together. From the mathematical standpoint, on the other hand, superposition is easy—we simply add the two vectors. The field lines have some advantage in giving a vivid picture, but they also have some disadvantages. The direct interaction way of thinking has great advantages when thinking of electrical charges at rest, but has great disadvantages when dealing with charges in rapid motion.

The best way is to use the abstract field idea. That it is abstract is unfortunate, but necessary. The attempts to try to represent the electric field as the motion of some kind of gear wheels, or in terms of lines, or of stresses in some kind of material have used up more effort of physicists than it would have taken simply to get the right answers about electrodynamics. It is interesting that the correct equations for the behavior of light were worked out by MacCullagh in 1839. But people said to him: “Yes, but there is no real material whose mechanical properties could possibly satisfy those equations, and since light is an oscillation that must vibrate in something, we cannot believe this abstract equation business.” If people had been more open-minded, they might have believed in the right equations for the behavior of light a lot earlier than they did.

In the case of the magnetic field we can make the following point: Suppose that you finally succeeded in making up a picture of the magnetic field in terms of some kind of lines or of gear wheels running through space. Then you try to explain what happens to two charges moving in space, both at the same speed and parallel to each other. Because they are moving, they will behave like two currents and will have a magnetic field associated with them (like the currents in the wires of Fig. 1–8). An observer who was riding along with the two charges, however, would see both charges as stationary, and would say that there is no magnetic field. The “gear wheels” or “lines” disappear when you ride along with the object! All we have done is to invent a new problem. How can the gear wheels disappear?! The people who draw field lines are in a similar difficulty. Not only is it not possible to say whether the field lines move or do not move with charges—they may disappear completely in certain coordinate frames.

What we are saying, then, is that magnetism is really a relativistic effect. In the case of the two charges we just considered, travelling parallel to each other, we would expect to have to make relativistic corrections to their motion, with terms of order v2/c2
. These corrections must correspond to the magnetic force. But what about the force between the two wires in our experiment (Fig. 1–8). There the magnetic force is the whole force. It didn’t look like a “relativistic correction.” Also, if we estimate the velocities of the electrons in the wire (you can do this yourself), we find that their average speed along the wire is about 0.01
 centimeter per second. So v2/c2
 is about 10−25
. Surely a negligible “correction.” But no! Although the magnetic force is, in this case, 10−25
 of the “normal” electrical force between the moving electrons, remember that the “normal” electrical forces have disappeared because of the almost perfect balancing out—because the wires have the same number of protons as electrons. The balance is much more precise than one part in 1025
, and the small relativistic term which we call the magnetic force is the only term left. It becomes the dominant term.

It is the near-perfect cancellation of electrical effects which allowed relativity effects (that is, magnetism) to be studied and the correct equations—to order v2/c2
—to be discovered, even though physicists didn’t know that’s what was happening. And that is why, when relativity was discovered, the electromagnetic laws didn’t need to be changed. They—unlike mechanics—were already correct to a precision of v2/c2
.

1–6Electromagnetism in science and technology
Let us end this chapter by pointing out that among the many phenomena studied by the Greeks there were two very strange ones: that if you rubbed a piece of amber you could lift up little pieces of papyrus, and that there was a strange rock from the land of Magnesia which attracted iron. It is amazing to think that these were the only phenomena known to the Greeks in which the effects of electricity or magnetism were apparent. The reason that these were the only phenomena that appeared is due primarily to the fantastic precision of the balancing of charges that we mentioned earlier. Study by scientists who came after the Greeks uncovered one new phenomenon after another that were really some aspect of these amber and/or lodestone effects. Now we realize that the phenomena of chemical interaction and, ultimately, of life itself are to be understood in terms of electromagnetism.

At the same time that an understanding of the subject of electromagnetism was being developed, technical possibilities that defied the imagination of the people that came before were appearing: it became possible to signal by telegraph over long distances, and to talk to another person miles away without any connections between, and to run huge power systems—a great water wheel, connected by filaments over hundreds of miles to another engine that turns in response to the master wheel—many thousands of branching filaments—ten thousand engines in ten thousand places running the machines of industries and homes—all turning because of the knowledge of the laws of electromagnetism.

Today we are applying even more subtle effects. The electrical forces, enormous as they are, can also be very tiny, and we can control them and use them in very many ways. So delicate are our instruments that we can tell what a man is doing by the way he affects the electrons in a thin metal rod hundreds of miles away. All we need to do is to use the rod as an antenna for a television receiver!

From a long view of the history of mankind—seen from, say, ten thousand years from now—there can be little doubt that the most significant event of the 19th century will be judged as Maxwell’s discovery of the laws of electrodynamics. The American Civil War will pale into provincial insignificance in comparison with this important scientific event of the same decade.

We need only to add a remark about some conventions for the sign of the circulation. ↩
Copyright © 1964, 2006, 2013 by the California Institute of Technology, Michael A. Gottlieb and Rudolf Pfeiffer
2–1Understanding physics
The physicist needs a facility in looking at problems from several points of view. The exact analysis of real physical problems is usually quite complicated, and any particular physical situation may be too complicated to analyze directly by solving the differential equation. But one can still get a very good idea of the behavior of a system if one has some feel for the character of the solution in different circumstances. Ideas such as the field lines, capacitance, resistance, and inductance are, for such purposes, very useful. So we will spend much of our time analyzing them. In this way we will get a feel as to what should happen in different electromagnetic situations. On the other hand, none of the heuristic models, such as field lines, is really adequate and accurate for all situations. There is only one precise way of presenting the laws, and that is by means of differential equations. They have the advantage of being fundamental and, so far as we know, precise. If you have learned the differential equations you can always go back to them. There is nothing to unlearn.

It will take you some time to understand what should happen in different circumstances. You will have to solve the equations. Each time you solve the equations, you will learn something about the character of the solutions. To keep these solutions in mind, it will be useful also to study their meaning in terms of field lines and of other concepts. This is the way you will really “understand” the equations. That is the difference between mathematics and physics. Mathematicians, or people who have very mathematical minds, are often led astray when “studying” physics because they lose sight of the physics. They say: “Look, these differential equations—the Maxwell equations—are all there is to electrodynamics; it is admitted by the physicists that there is nothing which is not contained in the equations. The equations are complicated, but after all they are only mathematical equations and if I understand them mathematically inside out, I will understand the physics inside out.” Only it doesn’t work that way. Mathematicians who study physics with that point of view—and there have been many of them—usually make little contribution to physics and, in fact, little to mathematics. They fail because the actual physical situations in the real world are so complicated that it is necessary to have a much broader understanding of the equations.

What it means really to understand an equation—that is, in more than a strictly mathematical sense—was described by Dirac. He said: “I understand what an equation means if I have a way of figuring out the characteristics of its solution without actually solving it.” So if we have a way of knowing what should happen in given circumstances without actually solving the equations, then we “understand” the equations, as applied to these circumstances. A physical understanding is a completely unmathematical, imprecise, and inexact thing, but absolutely necessary for a physicist.

Ordinarily, a course like this is given by developing gradually the physical ideas—by starting with simple situations and going on to more and more complicated situations. This requires that you continuously forget things you previously learned—things that are true in certain situations, but which are not true in general. For example, the “law” that the electrical force depends on the square of the distance is not always true. We prefer the opposite approach. We prefer to take first the complete laws, and then to step back and apply them to simple situations, developing the physical ideas as we go along. And that is what we are going to do.

Our approach is completely opposite to the historical approach in which one develops the subject in terms of the experiments by which the information was obtained. But the subject of physics has been developed over the past 200 years by some very ingenious people, and as we have only a limited time to acquire our knowledge, we cannot possibly cover everything they did. Unfortunately one of the things that we shall have a tendency to lose in these lectures is the historical, experimental development. It is hoped that in the laboratory some of this lack can be corrected. You can also fill in what we must leave out by reading the Encyclopedia Britannica, which has excellent historical articles on electricity and on other parts of physics. You will also find historical information in many textbooks on electricity and magnetism.

2–2Scalar and vector fields—T
 and h
We begin now with the abstract, mathematical view of the theory of electricity and magnetism. The ultimate idea is to explain the meaning of the laws given in Chapter 1. But to do this we must first explain a new and peculiar notation that we want to use. So let us forget electromagnetism for the moment and discuss the mathematics of vector fields. It is of very great importance, not only for electromagnetism, but for all kinds of physical circumstances. Just as ordinary differential and integral calculus is so important to all branches of physics, so also is the differential calculus of vectors. We turn to that subject.

Listed below are a few facts from the algebra of vectors. It is assumed that you already know them.
A⋅B=scalar=AxBx+AyBy+AzBzA×B=vector(A×B)z(A×B)x(A×B)y=Ax=Ay=AzByBzBx−Ay−Az−AxBxByBzA×A=0A⋅(A×B)=0A⋅(B×C)=(A×B)⋅CA×(B×C)=B(A⋅C)−C(A⋅B)(2.1)(2.2)(2.3)(2.4)(2.5)(2.6)
 

Also we will want to use the two following equalities from the calculus:
Δf(x,y,z)=∂f∂xΔx+∂f∂yΔy+∂f∂zΔz,∂2f∂x∂y=∂2f∂y∂x.(2.7)(2.8)
The first equation (2.7) is, of course, true only in the limit that Δx
, Δy
, and Δz
 go toward zero.


The simplest possible physical field is a scalar field. By a field, you remember, we mean a quantity which depends upon position in space. By a scalar field we merely mean a field which is characterized at each point by a single number—a scalar. Of course the number may change in time, but we need not worry about that for the moment. We will talk about what the field looks like at a given instant. As an example of a scalar field, consider a solid block of material which has been heated at some places and cooled at others, so that the temperature of the body varies from point to point in a complicated way. Then the temperature will be a function of x
, y
, and z
, the position in space measured in a rectangular coordinate system. Temperature is a scalar field.


Fig. 2–1. Temperature T
 is an example of a scalar field. With each point (x,y,z)
 in space there is associated a number T(x,y,z)
. All points on the surface marked T=20∘
 (shown as a curve at z=0
) are at the same temperature. The arrows are samples of the heat flow vector h
.
One way of thinking about scalar fields is to imagine “contours” which are imaginary surfaces drawn through all points for which the field has the same value, just as contour lines on a map connect points with the same height. For a temperature field the contours are called “isothermal surfaces” or isotherms. Figure 2–1 illustrates a temperature field and shows the dependence of T
 on x
 and y
 when z=0
. Several isotherms are drawn.


Fig. 2–2. The velocity of the atoms in a rotating object is an example of a vector field.
There are also vector fields. The idea is very simple. A vector is given for each point in space. The vector varies from point to point. As an example, consider a rotating body. The velocity of the material of the body at any point is a vector which is a function of position (Fig. 2–2). As a second example, consider the flow of heat in a block of material. If the temperature in the block is high at one place and low at another, there will be a flow of heat from the hotter places to the colder. The heat will be flowing in different directions in different parts of the block. The heat flow is a directional quantity which we call h
. Its magnitude is a measure of how much heat is flowing. Examples of the heat flow vector are also shown in Fig. 2–1.


Fig. 2–3. Heat flow is a vector field. The vector h
 points along the direction of the flow. Its magnitude is the energy transported per unit time across a surface element oriented perpendicular to the flow, divided by the area of the surface element.
Let’s make a more precise definition of h
: The magnitude of the vector heat flow at a point is the amount of thermal energy that passes, per unit time and per unit area, through an infinitesimal surface element at right angles to the direction of flow. The vector points in the direction of flow (see Fig. 2–3). In symbols: If ΔJ
 is the thermal energy that passes per unit time through the surface element Δa
, then
h=ΔJΔaef,(2.9)
where ef
 is a unit vector in the direction of flow.


Fig. 2–4. The heat flow through Δa2
 is the same as through Δa1
.
The vector h
 can be defined in another way—in terms of its components. We ask how much heat flows through a small surface at any angle with respect to the flow. In Fig. 2–4 we show a small surface Δa2
 inclined with respect to Δa1
, which is perpendicular to the flow. The unit vector n
 is normal to the surface Δa2
. The angle θ
 between n
 and h
 is the same as the angle between the surfaces (since h
 is normal to Δa1
). Now what is the heat flow per unit area through Δa2
? The flow through Δa2
 is the same as through Δa1
; only the areas are different. In fact, Δa1=Δa2cosθ
. The heat flow through Δa2
 is
ΔJΔa2=ΔJΔa1cosθ=h⋅n.(2.10)
We interpret this equation: the heat flow (per unit time and per unit area) through any surface element whose unit normal is n
, is given by h⋅n
. Equally, we could say: the component of the heat flow perpendicular to the surface element Δa2
 is h⋅n
. We can, if we wish, consider that these statements define h
. We will be applying the same ideas to other vector fields.

2–3Derivatives of fields—the gradient
When fields vary in time, we can describe the variation by giving their derivatives with respect to t
. We want to describe the variations with position in a similar way, because we are interested in the relationship between, say, the temperature in one place and the temperature at a nearby place. How shall we take the derivative of the temperature with respect to position? Do we differentiate the temperature with respect to x
? Or with respect to y
, or z
?

Useful physical laws do not depend upon the orientation of the coordinate system. They should, therefore, be written in a form in which either both sides are scalars or both sides are vectors. What is the derivative of a scalar field, say ∂T/∂x
? Is it a scalar, or a vector, or what? It is neither a scalar nor a vector, as you can easily appreciate, because if we took a different x
-axis, ∂T/∂x
 would certainly be different. But notice: We have three possible derivatives: ∂T/∂x
, ∂T/∂y
, and ∂T/∂z
. Since there are three kinds of derivatives and we know that it takes three numbers to form a vector, perhaps these three derivatives are the components of a vector:
(∂T∂x,∂T∂y,∂T∂z)=?a vector.(2.11)

Of course it is not generally true that any three numbers form a vector. It is true only if, when we rotate the coordinate system, the components of the vector transform among themselves in the correct way. So it is necessary to analyze how these derivatives are changed by a rotation of the coordinate system. We shall show that (2.11) is indeed a vector. The derivatives do transform in the correct way when the coordinate system is rotated.

We can see this in several ways. One way is to ask a question whose answer is independent of the coordinate system, and try to express the answer in an “invariant” form. For instance, if S=A⋅B
, and if A
 and B
 are vectors, we know—because we proved it in Chapter 11 of Vol. I—that S
 is a scalar. We know that S
 is a scalar without investigating whether it changes with changes in coordinate systems. It can’t, because it’s a dot product of two vectors. Similarly, if we have three numbers B1
, B2
, and B3
 and we find out that for every vector A
AxB1+AyB2+AzB3=S,(2.12)
where S
 is the same for any coordinate system, then it must be that the three numbers B1
, B2
, B3
 are the components Bx
, By
, Bz
 of some vector B
.

Now let’s think of the temperature field. Suppose we take two points P1
 and P2
, separated by the small interval ΔR
. The temperature at P1
 is T1
 and at P2
 is T2
, and the difference ΔT=T2−T1
. The temperatures at these real, physical points certainly do not depend on what axis we choose for measuring the coordinates. In particular, ΔT
 is a number independent of the coordinate system. It is a scalar.


Fig. 2–5. The vector ΔR
, whose components are Δx
, Δy
, and Δz
.
If we choose some convenient set of axes, we could write T1=T(x,y,z)
 and T2=T(x+Δx,y+Δy,z+Δz)
, where Δx
, Δy
, and Δz
 are the components of the vector ΔR
 (Fig. 2–5). Remembering Eq. (2.7), we can write
ΔT=∂T∂xΔx+∂T∂yΔy+∂T∂zΔz.(2.13)
The left side of Eq. (2.13) is a scalar. The right side is the sum of three products with Δx
, Δy
, and Δz
, which are the components of a vector. It follows that the three numbers
∂T∂x,∂T∂y,∂T∂z
are also the x
-, y
-, and z
-components of a vector. We write this new vector with the symbol ∇T
. The symbol ∇
 (called “del”) is an upside-down Δ
, and is supposed to remind us of differentiation. People read ∇T
 in various ways: “del-T
,” or “gradient of T
,” or “grad T
;”1
grad T=∇T=(∂T∂x,∂T∂y,∂T∂z).(2.14)

Using this notation, we can rewrite Eq. (2.13) in the more compact form
ΔT=∇T⋅ΔR.(2.15)
In words, this equation says that the difference in temperature between two nearby points is the dot product of the gradient of T
 and the vector displacement between the points. The form of Eq. (2.15) also illustrates clearly our proof above that ∇T
 is indeed a vector.

Perhaps you are still not convinced? Let’s prove it in a different way. (Although if you look carefully, you may be able to see that it’s really the same proof in a longer-winded form!) We shall show that the components of ∇T
 transform in just the same way that components of R
 do. If they do, ∇T
 is a vector according to our original definition of a vector in Chapter 11 of Vol. I. We take a new coordinate system x′
, y′
, z′
, and in this new system we calculate ∂T/∂x′
, ∂T/∂y′
, and ∂T/∂z′
. To make things a little simpler, we let z=z′
, so that we can forget about the z
-coordinate. (You can check out the more general case for yourself.)


Fig. 2–6. (a) Transformation to a rotated coordinate system. (b) Special case of an interval ΔR
 parallel to the x
-axis.
We take an x′y′
-system rotated an angle θ
 with respect to the xy
-system, as in Fig. 2–6(a). For a point (x,y)
 the coordinates in the prime system are
x′y′=xcosθ=−xsinθ+ysinθ,+ycosθ.(2.16)(2.17)
Or, solving for x
 and y
,
xy=x′cosθ=x′sinθ−y′sinθ,+y′cosθ.(2.18)(2.19)
If any pair of numbers transforms with these equations in the same way that x
 and y
 do, they are the components of a vector.

Now let’s look at the difference in temperature between the two nearby points P1
 and P2
, chosen as in Fig. 2–6(b). If we calculate with the x
- and y
-coordinates, we would write
ΔT=∂T∂xΔx(2.20)
—since Δy
 is zero.

What would a computation in the prime system give? We would have written
ΔT=∂T∂x′Δx′+∂T∂y′Δy′.(2.21)
Looking at Fig. 2–6(b), we see that
Δx′=Δxcosθ(2.22)
and
Δy′=−Δxsinθ,(2.23)
since Δy′
 is negative when Δx
 is positive. Substituting these in Eq. (2.21), we find that
ΔT=∂T∂x′Δxcosθ−∂T∂y′Δxsinθ=(∂T∂x′cosθ−∂T∂y′sinθ)Δx.(2.24)(2.25)
Comparing Eq. (2.25) with (2.20), we see that
∂T∂x=∂T∂x′cosθ−∂T∂y′sinθ.(2.26)
This equation says that ∂T/∂x
 is obtained from ∂T/∂x′
 and ∂T/∂y′
, just as x
 is obtained from x′
 and y′
 in Eq. (2.18). So ∂T/∂x
 is the x
-component of a vector. The same kind of arguments would show that ∂T/∂y
 and ∂T/∂z
 are y
- and z
-components. So ∇T
 is definitely a vector. It is a vector field derived from the scalar field T
.

2–4The operator ∇
Now we can do something that is extremely amusing and ingenious—and characteristic of the things that make mathematics beautiful. The argument that grad T
, or ∇T
, is a vector did not depend upon what scalar field we were differentiating. All the arguments would go the same if T
 were replaced by any scalar field. Since the transformation equations are the same no matter what we differentiate, we could just as well omit the T
 and replace Eq. (2.26) by the operator equation
∂∂x=∂∂x′cosθ−∂∂y′sinθ.(2.27)
We leave the operators, as Jeans said, “hungry for something to differentiate.”

Since the differential operators themselves transform as the components of a vector should, we can call them components of a vector operator. We can write
∇=(∂∂x,∂∂y,∂∂z),(2.28)
which means, of course,
∇x=∂∂x,∇y=∂∂y,∇z=∂∂z.(2.29)
We have abstracted the gradient away from the T
—that is the wonderful idea.

You must always remember, of course, that ∇
 is an operator. Alone, it means nothing. If ∇
 by itself means nothing, what does it mean if we multiply it by a scalar—say T
—to get the product T∇
? (One can always multiply a vector by a scalar.) It still does not mean anything. Its x
-component is
T∂∂x,(2.30)
which is not a number, but is still some kind of operator. However, according to the algebra of vectors we would still call T∇
 a vector.

Now let’s multiply ∇
 by a scalar on the other side, so that we have the product (∇T)
. In ordinary algebra
TA=AT,(2.31)
but we have to remember that operator algebra is a little different from ordinary vector algebra. With operators we must always keep the sequence right, so that the operations make proper sense. You will have no difficulty if you just remember that the operator ∇
 obeys the same convention as the derivative notation. What is to be differentiated must be placed on the right of the ∇
. The order is important.

Keeping in mind this problem of order, we understand that T∇
 is an operator, but the product ∇T
 is no longer a hungry operator; the operator is completely satisfied. It is indeed a physical vector having a meaning. It represents the spatial rate of change of T
. The x
-component of ∇T
 is how fast T
 changes in the x
-direction. What is the direction of the vector ∇T
? We know that the rate of change of T
 in any direction is the component of ∇T
 in that direction (see Eq. (2.15)). It follows that the direction of ∇T
 is that in which it has the largest possible component—in other words, the direction in which T
 changes the fastest. The gradient of T
 has the direction of the steepest uphill slope (in T
).

2–5Operations with ∇
Can we do any other algebra with the vector operator ∇
? Let us try combining it with a vector. We can combine two vectors by making a dot product. We could make the products
(a vector)⋅∇,or∇⋅(a vector).
The first one doesn’t mean anything yet, because it is still an operator. What it might ultimately mean would depend on what it is made to operate on. The second product is some scalar field. (A⋅B
 is always a scalar.)

Let’s try the dot product of ∇
 with a vector field we know, say h
. We write out the components:
∇⋅h=∇xhx+∇yhy+∇zhz(2.32)
or
∇⋅h=∂hx∂x+∂hy∂y+∂hz∂z.(2.33)
The sum is invariant under a coordinate transformation. If we were to choose a different system (indicated by primes), we would have2
∇′⋅h=∂hx′∂x′+∂hy′∂y′+∂hz′∂z′,(2.34)
which is the same number as would be gotten from Eq. (2.33), even though it looks different. That is,
∇′⋅h=∇⋅h(2.35)
for every point in space. So ∇⋅h
 is a scalar field, which must represent some physical quantity. You should realize that the combination of derivatives in ∇⋅h
 is rather special. There are all sorts of other combinations like ∂hy/∂x
, which are neither scalars nor components of vectors.

The scalar quantity ∇⋅(a vector)
 is extremely useful in physics. It has been given the name the divergence. For example,
∇⋅h=div h=“divergence of h.”(2.36)
As we did for ∇T
, we can ascribe a physical significance to ∇⋅h
. We shall, however, postpone that until later.

First, we wish to see what else we can cook up with the vector operator ∇
. What about a cross product? We must expect that
∇×h=a vector.(2.37)
It is a vector whose components we can write by the usual rule for cross products (see Eq. (2.2)):
(∇×h)z=∇xhy−∇yhx=∂hy∂x−∂hx∂y.(2.38)
Similarly,
(∇×h)x=∇yhz−∇zhy=∂hz∂y−∂hy∂z(2.39)
and
(∇×h)y=∇zhx−∇xhz=∂hx∂z−∂hz∂x.(2.40)

The combination ∇×h
 is called “the curl of h
.” The reason for the name and the physical meaning of the combination will be discussed later.

Summarizing, we have three kinds of combinations with ∇
:
∇T∇⋅h∇×h=grad T=div h=curl h=a vector,=a scalar,=a vector.
Using these combinations, we can write about the spatial variations of fields in a convenient way—in a way that is general, in that it doesn’t depend on any particular set of axes.

As an example of the use of our vector differential operator ∇
, we write a set of vector equations which contain the same laws of electromagnetism that we gave in words in Chapter 1. They are called Maxwell’s equations.
Maxwell’s Equations(1)(2)(3)(4)∇⋅E∇×E∇⋅Bc2∇×B=ρϵ0=−∂B∂t=0=∂E∂t+jϵ0(2.41)
 
where ρ
 (rho), the “electric charge density,” is the amount of charge per unit volume, and j
, the “electric current density,” is the rate at which charge flows through a unit area per second. These four equations contain the complete classical theory of the electromagnetic field. You see what an elegantly simple form we can get with our new notation!

2–6The differential equation of heat flow
Let us give another example of a law of physics written in vector notation. The law is not a precise one, but for many metals and a number of other substances that conduct heat it is quite accurate. You know that if you take a slab of material and heat one face to temperature T2
 and cool the other to a different temperature T1
 the heat will flow through the material from T2
 to T1
 [Fig. 2–7(a)]. The heat flow is proportional to the area A
 of the faces, and to the temperature difference. It is also inversely proportional to d
, the distance between the plates. (For a given temperature difference, the thinner the slab the greater the heat flow.) Letting J
 be the thermal energy that passes per unit time through the slab, we write
J=κ(T2−T1)Ad.(2.42)
The constant of proportionality κ
 (kappa) is called the thermal conductivity.


Fig. 2–7. (a) Heat flow through a slab. (b) An infinitesimal slab parallel to an isothermal surface in a large block.
What will happen in a more complicated case? Say in an odd-shaped block of material in which the temperature varies in peculiar ways? Suppose we look at a tiny piece of the block and imagine a slab like that of Fig. 2–7(a) on a miniature scale. We orient the faces parallel to the isothermal surfaces, as in Fig. 2–7(b), so that Eq. (2.42) is correct for the small slab.

If the area of the small slab is ΔA
, the heat flow per unit time is
ΔJ=κΔTΔAΔs,(2.43)
where Δs
 is the thickness of the slab. Now ΔJ/ΔA
 we have defined earlier as the magnitude of h
, whose direction is the heat flow. The heat flow will be from T1+ΔT
 toward T1
 and so it will be perpendicular to the isotherms, as drawn in Fig. 2–7(b). Also, ΔT/Δs
 is just the rate of change of T
 with position. And since the position change is perpendicular to the isotherms, our ΔT/Δs
 is the maximum rate of change. It is, therefore, just the magnitude of ∇T
. Now since the direction of ∇T
 is opposite to that of h
, we can write (2.43) as a vector equation:
h=−κ∇T.(2.44)
(The minus sign is necessary because heat flows “downhill” in temperature.) Equation (2.44) is the differential equation of heat conduction in bulk materials. You see that it is a proper vector equation. Each side is a vector if κ
 is just a number. It is the generalization to arbitrary cases of the special relation (2.42) for rectangular slabs. Later we should learn to write all sorts of elementary physics relations like (2.42) in the more sophisticated vector notation. This notation is useful not only because it makes the equations look simpler. It also shows most clearly the physical content of the equations without reference to any arbitrarily chosen coordinate system.

2–7Second derivatives of vector fields
So far we have had only first derivatives. Why not second derivatives? We could have several combinations:
(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)∇⋅(∇T)∇×(∇T)∇(∇⋅h)∇⋅(∇×h)∇×(∇×h)(2.45)
 
You can check that these are all the possible combinations.

Let’s look first at the second one, (b). It has the same form as
A×(AT)=(A×A)T=0,
since A×A
 is always zero. So we should have
curl (grad T)=∇×(∇T)=0.(2.46)
We can see how this equation comes about if we go through once with the components:
[∇×(∇T)]z=∇x(∇T)y−∇y(∇T)x=∂∂x(∂T∂y)−∂∂y(∂T∂x),(2.47)
which is zero (by Eq. (2.8)). It goes the same for the other components. So ∇×(∇T)=0
, for any temperature distribution—in fact, for any scalar function.

Now let us take another example. Let us see whether we can find another zero. The dot product of a vector with a cross product which contains that vector is zero:
A⋅(A×B)=0,(2.48)
because A×B
 is perpendicular to A
, and so has no components in the direction A
. The same combination appears in (d) of (2.45), so we have
∇⋅(∇×h)=div (curl h)=0.(2.49)
Again, it is easy to show that it is zero by carrying through the operations with components.

Now we are going to state two mathematical theorems that we will not prove. They are very interesting and useful theorems for physicists to know.

In a physical problem we frequently find that the curl of some quantity—say of the vector field A
—is zero. Now we have seen (Eq. (2.46)) that the curl of a gradient is zero, which is easy to remember because of the way the vectors work. It could certainly be, then, that A
 is the gradient of some quantity, because then its curl would necessarily be zero. The interesting theorem is that if the curl A
 is zero, then A
 is always the gradient of something—there is some scalar field ψ
 (psi) such that A
 is equal to grad ψ
. In other words, we have the
Theorem:Ifthere is asuch that∇×AψA=∇ψ=0.(2.50)

There is a similar theorem if the divergence of A
 is zero. We have seen in Eq. (2.49) that the divergence of a curl of something is always zero. If you come across a vector field D
 for which div D
 is zero, then you can conclude that D
 is the curl of some vector field C
.
Theorem:Ifthere is asuch that∇⋅DCD=∇=0×C.(2.51)

In looking at the possible combinations of two ∇
 operators, we have found that two of them always give zero. Now we look at the ones that are not zero. Take the combination ∇⋅(∇T)
, which was first on our list. It is not, in general, zero. We write out the components:
∇T=i∇xT+j∇yT+k∇zT.
Then
∇⋅(∇T)=∇x(∇xT)+∇y(∇yT)+∇z(∇zT)=∂2T∂x2+∂2T∂y2+∂2T∂z2,(2.52)
which would, in general, come out to be some number. It is a scalar field.

You see that we do not need to keep the parentheses, but can write, without any chance of confusion,
∇⋅(∇T)=∇⋅∇T=(∇⋅∇)T=∇2T.(2.53)
We look at ∇2
 as a new operator. It is a scalar operator. Because it appears often in physics, it has been given a special name—the Laplacian.
Laplacian=∇2=∂2∂x2+∂2∂y2+∂2∂z2.(2.54)

Since the Laplacian is a scalar operator, we may operate with it on a vector—by which we mean the same operation on each component in rectangular coordinates:
∇2h=(∇2hx,∇2hy,∇2hz).

Let’s look at one more possibility: ∇×(∇×h)
, which was (e) in the list (2.45). Now the curl of the curl can be written differently if we use the vector equality (2.6):
A×(B×C)=B(A⋅C)−C(A⋅B).(2.55)
In order to use this formula, we should replace A
 and B
 by the operator ∇
 and put C=h
. If we do that, we get
∇×(∇×h)=∇(∇⋅h)−h(∇⋅∇)…???
Wait a minute! Something is wrong. The first two terms are vectors all right (the operators are satisfied), but the last term doesn’t come out to anything. It’s still an operator. The trouble is that we haven’t been careful enough about keeping the order of our terms straight. If you look again at Eq. (2.55), however, you see that we could equally well have written it as
A×(B×C)=B(A⋅C)−(A⋅B)C.(2.56)
The order of terms looks better. Now let’s make our substitution in (2.56). We get
∇×(∇×h)=∇(∇⋅h)−(∇⋅∇)h.(2.57)
This form looks all right. It is, in fact, correct, as you can verify by computing the components. The last term is the Laplacian, so we can equally well write
∇×(∇×h)=∇(∇⋅h)−∇2h.(2.58)

We have had something to say about all of the combinations in our list of double ∇
's, except for (c), ∇(∇⋅h)
. It is a possible vector field, but there is nothing special to say about it. It’s just some vector field which may occasionally come up.

It will be convenient to have a table of our conclusions:
(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)(∇⋅(∇T)=∇2T=a scalar field∇×(∇T)=0∇(∇⋅h)=a vector field∇⋅(∇×h)=0∇×(∇×h)=∇(∇⋅h)−∇2h∇⋅∇)h=∇2h=a vector field(2.59)
 
You may notice that we haven’t tried to invent a new vector operator (∇×∇)
. Do you see why?

2–8Pitfalls
We have been applying our knowledge of ordinary vector algebra to the algebra of the operator ∇
. We have to be careful, though, because it is possible to go astray. There are two pitfalls which we will mention, although they will not come up in this course. What would you say about the following expression, that involves the two scalar functions ψ
 and ϕ
 (phi):
(∇ψ)×(∇ϕ)?
You might want to say: it must be zero because it’s just like
(Aa)×(Ab),
which is zero because the cross product of two equal vectors A×A
 is always zero. But in our example the two operators ∇
 are not equal! The first one operates on one function, ψ
; the other operates on a different function, ϕ
. So although we represent them by the same symbol ∇
, they must be considered as different operators. Clearly, the direction of ∇ψ
 depends on the function ψ
, so it is not likely to be parallel to ∇ϕ
:
(∇ψ)×(∇ϕ)≠0(generally).
Fortunately, we won’t have to use such expressions. (What we have said doesn’t change the fact that ∇×∇ψ=0
 for any scalar field, because here both ∇
’s operate on the same function.)

Pitfall number two (which, again, we need not get into in our course) is the following: The rules that we have outlined here are simple and nice when we use rectangular coordinates. For example, if we have ∇2h
 and we want the x
-component, it is
(∇2h)x=(∂2∂x2+∂2∂y2+∂2∂z2)hx=∇2hx.(2.60)
The same expression would not work if we were to ask for the radial component of ∇2h
. The radial component of ∇2h
 is not equal to ∇2hr
. The reason is that when we are dealing with the algebra of vectors, the directions of the vectors are all quite definite. But when we are dealing with vector fields, their directions are different at different places. If we try to describe a vector field in, say, polar coordinates, what we call the “radial” direction varies from point to point. So we can get into a lot of trouble when we start to differentiate the components. For example, even for a constant vector field, the radial component changes from point to point.

It is usually safest and simplest just to stick to rectangular coordinates and avoid trouble, but there is one exception worth mentioning: Since the Laplacian ∇2
, is a scalar, we can write it in any coordinate system we want to (for example, in polar coordinates). But since it is a differential operator, we should use it only on vectors whose components are in a fixed direction—that means rectangular coordinates. So we shall express all of our vector fields in terms of their x
-, y
-, and z
-components when we write our vector differential equations out in components.

In our notation, the expression (a,b,c)
 represents a vector with components a
, b
, and c
. If you like to use the unit vectors i
, j
, and k
, you may write
∇T=i∂T∂x+j∂T∂y+k∂T∂z.
↩
We think of h
 as a physical quantity that depends on position in space, and not strictly as a mathematical function of three variables. When h
 is “differentiated” with respect to x
, y
, and z
, or with respect to x′
, y′
, and z′
, the mathematical expression for h
 must first be expressed as a function of the appropriate variables. ↩
Copyright © 1964, 2006, 2013 by the California Institute of Technology, Michael A. Gottlieb and Rudolf Pfeiffer